Redes de Computadores 
 

1st Semestre, 2026/2027 
LEIC Alameda 

 

Programming using the Sockets interface 
 

“NetBoX”  
Phase II 

 
Date: 17 September 2026 

 

1. Introduction 
 

The goal of this project is to implement a distributed file storage and sharing platform, 
called NetBoX, using the sockets interface. The platform allows users to publish 
information about files they are willing to share, search for files published by other users, 
inspect different published versions, and download files directly from those users. 
NetBoX combines centralized coordination with decentralized peer-to-peer file transfer. 
 
The development of the project requires implementing a User Application. A Directory 
Server (DS) will be provided by the course instructors and will run on a machine with a 
known IPv4 address and port. The DS stores registered users, active sessions, and 
resource metadata, but never stores the actual file contents. Files remain stored locally at 
the users’ machines and are transferred directly between User applications. 
 
Students are responsible for implementing the User Application only. Multiple User 
application instances are intended to operate simultaneously on different machines 
connected to the Internet. 
 
Each User application performs multiple roles: 

• UDP client of the DS for user management, publication, removal, listing, and 
peer-location requests; 

• TCP client of the DS for receiving information about existing resources; 
• TCP peer client for downloading a selected file from another User application. 
• TCP peer server for handling incoming file-transfer requests; 

 
 
Project evaluation is continuous throughout the semester and includes periodic 
checkpoints, intermediate assessments, and a final project demonstration and 
discussion. Students are therefore expected to make regular progress during the semester.  
 
 
Attendance of lab classes is mandatory.  

17 Sept 2026   



2. Project Description 
 
The User application interface allows controlling the actions to take through keyboard 
commands, including login, logout, publishing files, removing published files, listing 
available resources, searching for resources, and downloading files from peers. 
• Login (login). Each user is identified by a user ID, UID, a 6-digit IST student number, 

and a password composed of 8 alphanumeric (only letters and digits) characters. 
When the DS receives a login request it will inform of a successful or incorrect login 
attempt or, in case the UID was not yet present at the DS, it registers a new user. 

• Publish a resource (publish). The User application informs the DS that a file available 
in the local machine should be advertised to other users. The DS stores information 
associating the published file with the corresponding user. The command also sends 
information about the shared file, including size of file and its type (label). 

• Remove a resource (remove). The User application informs the DS that a previously 
published resource should no longer be advertised to other users. 

• List resources (list). The User application asks the DS for a list of the resources 
currently known in the network. The DS replies with the requested list or indicates 
that no resources are currently available. The list only contains file names. 

• List different versions (versions). The User application asks the DS for the list of 
existing versions of resource (file). The DS replies with the requested list or indicates 
that no resources are currently available. The list includes all users who announced 
this resource, including size, label, time, and availability. 

• Search for a resource (where). The User application asks the DS for Location of a 
specific resource. The DS replies with the network location of the user that has 
previously published the requested resource and is currently available. 

• Download a resource (get). The User application contacts another User application 
directly and requests the transfer of the selected resource. If the resource exists and is 
available, the file is transferred directly between the two peers.  

• Unregister (unregister). The User application asks the DS to unregister this user (the 
currently logged-in user). Resources previously published by that user remain stored in 
the DS database but are no longer associated with an active user session.  

• Logout (logout). The user can ask the DS server to terminate the current user’s session. 
• Exit (exit). The user can ask to exit the User application. If a user is still logged in, 

then the User application informs the user that the logout command should be 
executed first. 

 
 
The implementation uses application-layer protocols operating over the transport-layer 
services made available by the sockets interface. Communication with the Directory 
Server is supported using UDP and TCP, while file transfer between users is supported 
using TCP. 
 
The objective of the project is not only to implement a working distributed file sharing 
application, but also to understand protocol design, transport-layer trade-offs, peer-to-
peer communication, resource discovery, and event-driven socket programming. 
 
  

17 Sept 2026   



2.1. Progressive development  
 
The project is developed progressively throughout the semester.  
Phase I: implement the UDP client operations needed for login, logout, and unregister. 
Students are initially required to implement simple communication with the Directory 
Server (using UDP). Students develop a working UDP client that communicates with the 
UDP server provided by the course instructors. 
 
Phase II: include publishing and removal of resources (files), including local file 
validation and metadata management. 
Students are required to extend the UDP capabilities to include resource publication.  
 
Phase II should be concluded in week 6. 
 
 

  

17 Sept 2026   



3. Project Specification – Phase II 
 

3.1. User Application (User) 
 

The program implementing the users of the NetBox (User) is invoked using:  
 

./user -m peerport [-n DSIP] [-p DSport], 
 

where: 
 

peerport is the mandatory TCP port where the User application accepts 
incoming file-transfer requests from other users. This is a mandatory argument. 

DSIP  is the IP address of the machine where the Directory Server (DS) 
runs. This is an optional argument. If this argument is omitted, the application 
should assume the DSIP value provided by the professors. 

DSport  is the well-known UDP port where the DS accepts requests. This is 
an optional argument. If omitted, it assumes the UDP port value provided by 
the professors. 

 

Once the User application is running, the user can login, logout, unregister.  
During the first login of a user, its identifier, UID, is used to register this user in the DS 
database. The user also has the possibility to logout, unregister or exit the User 
application.  
Once the User application is running, it can publish or remove resources, as well as 
request a list of the resources currently known to the system.  
 

The commands supported by the User interface (using the keyboard for input) are: 
• login UID password – following this command, the User application sends 

a message to the DS, using the UDP protocol. The DS confirms the ID, UID, and 
password of this user, or registers it if this UID is not present in the DS database. 
The result of the request should be displayed: successful login, incorrect login 
attempt, or new user registered.  

• unregister – following this command, the User application sends a message 
to the DS, using the UDP protocol, asking to unregister the currently logged-in 
user. A logout operation is also performed.  
The result of the request should be displayed: successful unregister, unknown user, 
or incorrect unregister attempt.  

• logout – following this command, the User application sends a message to the 
DS, using the UDP protocol, asking to logout the currently logged-in user, with 
ID UID. Published resources remain stored in the DS database, but the user is no 
longer considered active and will not be returned as an available peer until a new 
successful login is performed.  
The result of the request should be displayed: successful logout, unknown user, 
or user not logged in.  

• exit – this is a request to terminate the User application. If a user is still logged 
in the User application should inform the user to first execute the logout command. 
Otherwise, the application can be terminated. This is a local command, not 
involving communication with the DS. 

• publish filename label – following this command, the User application 
publishes the file filename in the DS, using the UDP protocol. Before sending the 
request to the DS, the User application should verify that the file exists in the local 

17 Sept 2026   



directory. The user provides extra metadata about the file in label, which is used 
to provide more information about the file being shared, ex. “480p”, “1080p”.  
The DS stores information indicating that this user is making the file available to 
other users. The result of the request should be displayed: successful publication, 
unsuccessful publication, user not logged in, or incorrect password. 

• remove filename – following this command, the User application sends a 
message to the DS, using the UDP protocol, asking to remove the file filename 
from the list of resources published by the currently logged-in user. The result of 
the request should be displayed: successful removal, resource not found, user not 
logged in, or incorrect password. 

• list – following this command, the User application sends a message to the DS, 
using the UDP protocol, asking for the list of files currently known in the network. 
The DS replies with the requested list, up to a maximum number of entries, or 
informs the User that no resources are currently known. The list received should 
be displayed to the user in a human-friendly format. 

• versions filename – following this command, the User application sends a 
message to the DS, using the TCP protocol, asking for the different users sharing 
this file, along with the metadata associated with each use. The DS replies with 
the list of available peers, including their UID, size of the file, date of publication 
and the status of the user. The information received should be displayed to the 
user in a human-friendly format. 

 

Only one messaging command can be issued at a given time.  
The result of each interaction with the DS should be displayed to the user. 
  

17 Sept 2026   



3.2. Directory Server (DS) 
 

 
The program implementing the Directory Server (DS) is provided by the course 
instructors. Students are not required to implement a version of this server. 
 
The DS runs a UDP server and a TCP server responsible for managing users and 
maintaining information about the resources available in the network. The DS stores 
information about registered users, currently logged-in users, and the resources published 
by those users. 
 
For each logged-in user, the DS maintains information about the user's network location, 
including the IP address and the TCP port where the User application accepts incoming 
file-transfer requests. 
 
The DS does not store the actual contents of any resource. Instead, it maintains metadata 
describing which users have published each resource and which of those users are 
currently available. The actual file contents remain stored locally at the users' machines 
and are transferred directly between User applications (implemented by the students) 
using peer-to-peer communication. 
 
A resource may be published by multiple users simultaneously. Therefore, for a given 
resource, the DS may maintain information about multiple available peers. When 
requested, the DS provides the information about all peers currently publishing the 
selected resource. 
 
  

17 Sept 2026   



4. Communication Protocols Specification – 
Phase II 

 

The communication protocols used to implement the distributed file storage are described 
in this section. For the communication protocols UID is always sent using 6 digits (only 
digits), and filename has to follow the specific formatting rules described at the end 
of this section. 
 
4.1. User–DS Protocol (in UDP) 
 

Part of the interaction between the user application (User) and the Directory Server (DS) 
is supported by the UDP protocol. The related request and reply protocol messages are 
described in this section. 
 
For the communication protocols, UID is always sent using 6 digits and password is 
always composed of 8 alphanumeric characters. 
 

a) LIN UID password peerTCPport 
Following the login command, the User application informs the DS that user 
UID, with password password, wants to login, to use the application. The field 
peerTCPport indicates the TCP port where this User application accepts 
incoming file-transfer requests from other users.  

b) RLI status 
In reply to a LIN request the DS checks if a user with ID UID is already registered. 
If so, the password password is checked, and for a correct match the DS takes 
note that the user is now logged in and replies with status = OK. For an incorrect 
password, the reply status is NOK. If the user was not yet registered, the DS 
registers and logs in this user, storing the corresponding UID, password, 
network location and peer TCP port. The reply status is then REG.  

 

c) LOU UID password 
Following the logout command the User application informs the DS that the 
currently logged-in user, with ID UID, wants to logout.  

d) RLO status 
In reply to a LOU request, the DS checks if a user with ID UID is logged in. If so, 
the user is logged out and the reply status is OK. If the user was not logged in, 
the reply status is NLG. If the user was not registered, the reply status is 
UNR. If the password is incorrect, the reply status is WRP. 

 

e) UNR UID password 
Following the unregister command, the User informs the DS that the 
currently logged-in user, with ID UID, wants to unregister. 

f) RUR status 
In reply to a UNR request, the DS checks if a user with ID UID is registered. If 
so, the user can be unregistered and reply status is OK. If the user was not 
logged in, the reply status is NOK. If the user was not registered, the reply 
status is UNR. If the password is incorrect, the reply status is WRP. 
When a user is successfully unregistered, a logout operation is also performed. 
 

17 Sept 2026   



g) PUB UID password filename Fsize label 
Following the publish command, the User informs the DS that user UID, 
with password password, wants to publish the resource identified by 
filename., with file size Fsize and some metadata in label. 
Before sending this request, the User application should verify that the file exists 
in the local directory. If the file does not exist locally, no request should be sent 
to the DS and the User application should inform the user. 
 

h) RPB status  

In reply to a PUB request, the DS checks if user UID is registered, logged in, and 
if the password is correct. If all is correct, the resource is successfully published, 
and the reply status is OK. A repeated publication for the same UID and 
filename updates the existing record and returns OK. If the user was not logged in, 
the reply status is NLG. If the user UID was not registered, the reply status 
is UNR. If the password is incorrect, the reply status is WRP. If the resource 
could not be published for any other reason, the reply status is NOK.  

 
i) REM UID password filename 

Following the remove command, the User application informs the DS that user 
UID, with password password, wants to remove the resource identified by 
filename from the list of resources published by this user. 
 

j) RRM status  

In reply to a REM request, the DS checks if user UID is registered, logged in, and 
if the password is correct. If all is correct, the resource is successfully removed, 
and the reply status is OK. If the user was not logged in, the reply status 
is NLG. If the user UID was not registered, the reply status is UNR. If the 
password is incorrect, the reply status is WRP. If the resource was not 
previously published by this user, the reply status is NOK.  

 

k) LST  
Following the list command, the User application asks the DS for the list of 
resources currently known in the network.  
 

l) RLS status[filename]*  
In reply to a LST request, the DS reply status is NOK, if no resources are 
currently known (meaning no published resources yet).  

Otherwise, the reply status is OK and a list of filenames is sent by the DS. The 
DS sends a maximum of 50 filenames. Each filename appears once in the list, 
even if it was published by multiple users. No login is required. 

 
 

The User application should always display information about the received replies in a 
human friendly format.  
In the above messages the separation between any two items consists of a single space. 
* [field] means that field is optional. 
 
Each request or reply message ends with the character “\n”.  
 

17 Sept 2026   



For replies including the status field it takes the value ERR when the syntax of the 
request message was incorrect or when the parameter values take invalid values. 
 

If an unexpected protocol message is received, the reply is ERR.  

17 Sept 2026   



4.2. User -DS Protocol (in TCP) 
 

Part of the interaction between the user application (User) and the Directory Server (DS) 
is supported by the TCP protocol. The related request and reply protocol messages are 
described in this section. 
 

a) VRS filename 
Following the versions command, the User application establishes a TCP 
connection with the DS, and asks to receive the list of available peers offering this 
file identified by filename. 

b) RVR status [UID Fsize label publication_time 
availability]* 
In reply to a VRS request, the DS sends the list of peers advertising for this 
resource (filename), in addition to the metadata for each peer, with status 
OK. The status is NOK, if no peer is available for such resource (filename). 
The metadata includes the size of this version of the file (Fsize), a small 
description of this resource (label), the publication time from this peer 
(publication_time), and if this peer is available online or not 
(availability). availability is AVL if user is online (available) and 
NAV otherwise. 

 
 
The filenames filename, is limited to a total of 24 alphanumerical characters (plus ‘-‘, 
‘_’ and ‘.’), including the separating dot and the 3-letter extension: “nnn…nnnn.xxx”.  
The file size Fsize is limited to 10 MB (10.106 B), being transmitted using a maximum 
of 8 digits. 
 

In the above messages the separation between any two items consists of a single space. 
Each request or reply message ends with the character “\n”.  
 

For replies including the status field it takes the value ERR when the syntax of the 
request message was incorrect or when the parameter values take invalid values. 
 

If an unexpected protocol message is received, the reply will be ERR. 
 
4.3. Validation and Limits 
 

Field/item Requirement 

UID Exactly 6 decimal digits (only digits)  

Password Exactly 8 ASCII alphanumeric characters 

Port Decimal integer from 1 to 65535 

Filename Maximum 24 alphanumerical characters; base uses letters, digits, - and _; dot 
plus exactly 3 alphanumeric extension characters 

Label 1–20 characters: letters, digits, - and _ 

Fsize 0 to 10,000,000 bytes 

RLS Maximum 50 filenames 
 

17 Sept 2026   



5. Development 
 
5.1. Development and test environment 
 
Make sure your code compiles and executes correctly in the development environment 
available in the lab LT5. 
 
If the file does not compile correctly in the development environment of lab LT5, marks 
will be deducted from the final grade of the laboratory part. 
 
5.2. Programming 
 
The operation of your program, developed in C or C++, may need to use the following 
set of system calls: 

• Reading user information into the application: fgets(); 

• Manipulation of strings: sscanf(), sprintf(); 

• UDP client management: socket(), close(); 

• UDP server management: socket(), bind(), close(); 

• UDP communication: sendto(), recvfrom(); 

• TCP client management: socket(), connect(), close(); 

• TCP server management: socket(), bind(), listen(), accept(), 
close(); 

• TCP communication: write(), read(); 

• Multiple inputs multiplexing: select(). 
 
5.3. Implementation notes 
 
Developed code should be adequately structured and commented.  
 
The read() and write() system calls may read and write, respectively, a smaller 
number of bytes than solicited – you need to ensure that your implementation still works 
correctly.  
 
The client and the server processes should not terminate abruptly in failure situations, 
such as these: 
• wrong protocol messages received by the server: an error message should be returned, 

as specified by the protocol; 
• wrong protocol messages received by the client: the interaction with the server is not 

continued and the user is informed; 
• error conditions from system calls: the programs should not terminate abruptly, 

avoiding cases of "segmentation fault" or "core dump". 
 

  

17 Sept 2026   



6. Bibliography 
 
• W. Richard Stevens, Unix Network Programming: Networking APIs: Sockets and 

XTI (Volume 1), 2nd edition, Prentice-Hall PTR, 1998, ISBN 0-13-490012-X, chap. 5. 
• D. E. Comer, Computer Networks and Internets, 2nd edition, Prentice Hall, Inc, 1999, 

ISBN 0-13-084222-2, chap. 24. 
• Michael J. Donahoo, Kenneth L. Calvert, TCP/IP Sockets in C: Practical Guide for 

Programmers, Morgan Kaufmann, ISBN 1558608265, 2000 
• On-line manual, man command 
 

7. Project Submission 
 
7.1. Code 
 
The project submission should include the source code of the programs implementing the 
User application, as well as the corresponding Makefile and the auto-avaliação excel file. 
The makefile should compile the code and place the executables in the current directory. 
 
7.2. Auxiliary Files 
 
Together with the project submission you should also include any auxiliary files needed 
for the project operation together with a readme.txt file. 
 
7.3. Submission 
 
The project submission is done by e-mail to the lab teacher, no later than December 4, 
2026, at 23:59 PM.  
You should create a single zip archive containing all the source code, makefile, and all 
auxiliary files required for executing the project. The archive should be prepared to be 
opened to the current directory and compiled with the command make.  
The name of the archive should follow the format: proj_groupnumber.zip 
 
 

8. Open Issues 
 
You are encouraged to think about how to extend this protocol in order to make it more 
generic.  
 
 

17 Sept 2026